Energy transitions

Motivation
This analysis explores the energy systems of the thirty largest energy consumers in the world in order to answer the question: "How quickly can energy systems change?" In other words, if we look at the data, how quickly have countries in the past replaced one fuel (say oil or coal) for another? We examine data from the BP Statistical Review of World Energy in order to answer this question. 

Analysis and conclusions

The textbook answer is "very slowly." Vaclav Smil, who has studied energy transitions as extensively as anyone, called them "long, complex, and not easily amenable to simple judgements, sweeping generalizations, and crisp deductions." Even so, he noted that: "The record on the global scale is unequivocal: All of the past shifts to new sources of primary energy have been gradual, prolonged affairs, with new sources taking decades from the beginning of production to become more than insignificant contributors, and then another two to three decades before capturing a quarter or a third of their respective energy markets." 

Yet even Smil noted that at a country level, "to say that … anything is possible would be an impermissible exaggeration, but the record displays a remarkable scope of developments, ranging from the centuries-old dominance of English coal to an almost instant demise of Dutch coal mining, from a highly idiosyncratic and swiftly changing evolution of Japan's energy use to the US orderly sequence of fuels during the first half of the twentieth century followed by a surprising post-1960 near-stasis of the primary energy make-up."

These two statements neatly summarize what we know about energy transitions: in the grand scheme of things, energy systems are big, inertial and slow-changing; but at a country level, we have seen remarkable transitions that have been substantial and speedy, especially when governments have been determined to change their country's energy mix or when a new, cheaper resource has become available. In 1973, France relied on oil for almost 70% of its energy; just twelve years later, in 1985, that share was down to 42.5%, as the country built up its nuclear sector. Japan's experience was similar: in 1978, oil made up almost 75% of the country's energy mix and within seven years, in 1985, its share had shrunk to 56%, with coal, gas and nuclear energy gaining market share. 

These examples are far from extreme—rather, they are common. Argentina's economy went from relying 80% on oil to just 30% over a 36-year period; Iran's oil dependency shrank by 43 percentage points in 22 years; in Indonesia, the market share of oil went from 77% in 1982 to 38% in 2015 (39 percentage points in 33 years); in Italy, the transformation was slower but no less remarkable: oil went from 76% in 1973 to 38% in 2014; and so on. In fact, when looking at the 30 largest energy consumers in the world, almost every country has experienced at least one and often two major changes in their energy mix—changes whereby a dominant fuel was losing around one percent market share a year for a sustained period of time. On average, these countries registered a 20 percentage point change over 10 years. And, in extreme cases, we have seen countries make more dramatic adjustments: in Japan, nuclear energy went from 13.3% of total energy in 2010 to less than 1% in 2012, a change that would be equivalent to shutting down all generation from nuclear, hydro, wind and solar in the United States.  

These changes may not seem important—is it enough to change the market share of a fuel by only 20 percentage points? Yet such changes can have a dramatic impact: in the IEA's 450 ppm (parts per million) scenario, which spells out the energy mix that could stabilize the concentration of greenhouse gasses at 450 ppm and thus prevent temperature increases above 2C, oil would have to lose 9 percentage points of market share between 2013 and 2040, and coal would have to lose almost 13%. In short, the scenario that could prevent the planet from overheating requires a 22-percentage point change over a 27-year period (combined with lower overall energy demand growth, of course). We have so many examples of countries that have accomplished such change in similar timeframes. 

So what can we learn from the countries that managed to change their fuel mix? In most cases, the change involved the replacement of either oil or coal in stationary (non-transport) uses with other fuels. We only have rare instances where the fuel losing market share was something else—for instance, Japan and Germany reducing their reliance on nuclear power after 2011, Ukraine reducing its use of gas and turning towards coal and nuclear power after the 2006 gas crisis with Russia, and the United Arab Emirates reducing its reliance on gas (gas consumption had risen in industry in the 1970s but, over time, rising oil consumption in power generation and transportation reduced gas' market share). 

Broadly, however, the trajectory is clear: less reliance on oil and coal and more of something else. When the dominant fuel losing market has been coal, the replacement has been chiefly oil and natural gas—and, in some instances, other sources such as nuclear power, hydro or renewables have made a contribution on the margin. Generally, however, relatively less coal has meant relatively more oil and natural gas. 

When the fuel losing market has been oil, the substations have been more varied. In some instances, the replacement fuel has been chiefly nuclear energy (e.g. France, Spain and Taiwan). In some cases, hydro has played an important role (Argentina, Canada, Venezuela) or even a dominant one (Brazil). In some cases, oil has given way to coal (e.g. Indonesia, Taiwan, Malaysia, South Korea, Turkey). In some cases, there has been a growing role for renewables (e.g. Italy). 

But mostly, less oil has meant more gas: in fact, there are very few examples worldwide where a country has managed to reduce its reliance on oil without, at the same time, growing its reliance on gas either alone or with other fuels. And for the most part, that gas been sourced domestically, either because it was newly discovered (Netherlands, the United Kingdom), or because it was newly exploited due to technological change (e.g. shale gas in the United States), or due to new infrastructure (e.g. domestic demand on the back of export-oriented LNG) or as a result of policy initiatives (e.g. reducing gas flaring). Even so, there are also some countries that have replaced oil with imported gas (e.g. Italy, France, Japan, Taiwan, Korea).
